Sandeepyadav1478/2025 06 19 deberta v2 model card update (#38895)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/model_doc/deberta-v2.md

-->

<div style="float: right;">
    <div class="flex flex-wrap space-x-1">
           <img alt="PyTorch" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-DE3412?style=flat&logo=pytorch&logoColor=white" >
           <img alt="TensorFlow" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/TensorFlow-FF6F00?style=flat&logo=tensorflow&logoColor=white">
    </div>
</div>

# DeBERTa-v2

> [DeBERTa-v2](https://huggingface.co/papers/2006.03654) is an advanced language model that builds on the original DeBERTa architecture, which itself is an evolution of BERT and RoBERTa. What makes DeBERTa-v2 special is its unique way of handling the meaning and position of words separately, using a disentangled attention mechanism—this helps it better understand context and relationships in language. The v2 version introduces a new, larger vocabulary, a sentencepiece-based tokenizer, nGram Induced Input Encoding (nGiE) for better local dependency learning, and more efficient parameter sharing in the attention layers. It also comes in larger sizes (900M and 1.5B parameters), which means it can tackle even more complex language tasks with higher accuracy.

Reviewer: Only need to focus on v2 :)

```suggestion
[DeBERTa-v2](https://huggingface.co/papers/2006.03654) improves on the original [DeBERTa](./deberta) architecture by using a SentencePiece-based tokenizer and a new vocabulary size of 128K. It also adds an additional convolutional layer within the first transformer layer to better learn local dependencies of input tokens. Finally, the position projection and content projection matrices are shared in the attention layer to reduce the number of parameters.
```

> You can find all the original [DeBERTa-v2] checkpoints under the [DeBERTa-v2](https://huggingface.co/microsoft?search_models=deberta-v2) collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find all the original [DeBERTa-v2] checkpoints under the [Microsoft](https://huggingface.co/microsoft?search_models=deberta-v2) organization.
```

> > [!TIP]
> > Click on the [DeBERTa-v2] models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to apply [DeBERTa-v2] to different text classification, token classification, question answering, and multiple choice tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> This model was contributed by [Pengcheng He](https://huggingface.co/DeBERTa).
>
> Click on the [DeBERTa-v2] models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to apply [DeBERTa-v2] to different language tasks.
```

The example below demonstrates how to generate text based on an image with [`Pipeline`] or the [`AutoModel`] class.

<hfoptions id="usage">
<hfoption id="Pipeline">

```py

> import torch

Reviewer: Use mnli finetuned checkpoint

```py
import torch
from transformers import pipeline
pipeline = pipeline(
    task="text-classification",
    model="microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge-mnli",
    device=0,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16
)
pipeline("DeBERTa-v2 is great at understanding context!")
```

from transformers import pipeline

# Example: Text classification with DeBERTa-v2
classifier = pipeline(
    task="text-classification",
    model="microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge",
    device=0,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16
)
result = classifier("DeBERTa-v2 is great at understanding context!")
print(result)
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="AutoModel">

```py

> from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModel

Reviewer: ```py
import torch
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForSequenceClassification

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    "microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge-mnli",
)
model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
    "microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge-mnli",
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    device_map="auto",
)
inputs = tokenizer("DeBERTa-v2 is great at understanding context!", return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")
outputs = model(**inputs)

logits = outputs.logits
predicted_class_id = logits.argmax().item()
predicted_label = model.config.id2label[predicted_class_id]
print(f"Predicted label: {predicted_label}")
```

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge")
model = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    pretrained_model_name_or_path="microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge",
    device_map=None
)

inputs = tokenizer("DeBERTa-v2 is great at understanding context!", return_tensors="pt")
outputs = model(**inputs)
print(outputs.last_hidden_state)

```

</hfoption>

> <hfoption id="transformers-cli">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<hfoption id="transformers CLI">
```

Reviewer: Should just be `transformers CLI` instead of `transformers-CLI`

```bash

> echo -e "Plants create [MASK] through a process known as photosynthesis." | transformers-cli run --task fill-mask --model microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge --device 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
echo -e "DeBERTa-v2 is great at understanding context!" | transformers-cli run --task text-classification --model microsoft/deberta-v2-xlarge-mnli --device 0
```

```
</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

Quantization reduces the memory burden of large models by representing the weights in a lower precision. Refer to the [Quantization](../quantization/overview) overview for more available quantization backends.

> The example below uses [bitsandbytes quantization](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/quantization) to only quantize the weights to 8-bit.

Reviewer: Remember to add code example under here!

```suggestion
The example below uses [bitsandbytes](../quantization/bitsandbytes) to only quantize the weights to 4-bits.
```

Reviewer: Hey, this is unresolved. It would be super nice to have a code example of quantization here

Author: Done

> ## Notes

Reviewer: Can remove these notes since they're addressed in the beginning
